# Automatic Generation of Makefiles

## Introduction

Once upon there was a HP-UX 7000 series machine lab in Lisbon. Back
there I got used to the convenience of the `mkmf` tool for generating
Makefiles.

I'l lazy so I admit that I never invested anytime in
[`automake`](https://www.gnu.org/software/automake/) or
[`CMake`](http://www.cmake.org/). As any psychologist will tell the
first experiences imprint you in a serious way and is hard to
deprogram those imprints.

Now that I've returned to C coding I was aching for finding a similar
tool on GNU/Linux. Et voil√†, here it is.

I got it from the original authors
[page](http://www.c-s.li/ports/mkmf). The author is V. Balaji from
Princeton University.

## Original documentation 

### mkmf features

It understands dependencies in f90 (modules and use), the fortran
include statement, and the cpp #include statement in any type of
source;

There are no restrictions on filenames, module names, etc.; It
supports the concept of overlays (where source is maintained in layers
of directories with a defined precedence);

It can keep track of changes to cpp flags, and knows when to recompile
affected source (i.e, files containing `#ifdefs` that have been changed
since the last invocation); It will run on any unix platform that has
perl version 5 installed; It is free, and released under GPL. External
users can download the source [here](http://www.gfdl.noaa.gov/~vb/mkmf/mkmf). 

mkmf is pronounced make-make-file or make-m-f or even McMuff (Paul Kushner's suggestion).

### mkmf user guide

The calling syntax is:

`mkmf [-a abspath] [-c cppdefs] [-o otherflags] [-d] [-f] [-m makefile] [-p program] [-t template] [-v] [-x] [args]`

 `-a` abspath attaches the abspath at the front of all relative paths
    to sourcefiles. If -a is not specified, the current working
    directory is the abspath.
    
 `-c` cppdefs is a list of cpp #defines to be passed to the source
    files: affected object files will be selectively removed if there
    has been a change in this state;

 `-o` otherflags is a list of compiler directives to be passed to the
    source files: it is rather similar to cppdefs except that these
    can be any flags. Also, by fortran convention, cpp is only invoked
    on .F and .F90 files; otherflags apply to all source files (.f and
    .f90 as well).

 `-d` is a debug flag to mkmf (much more verbose than -v, but
    probably of use only if you are modifying mkmf itself);

 `-f` is a formatting flag to restrict lines in the makefile to 256
 characters. This was introduced in response to a customer who wanted
 to edit his makefiles using vi). Lines longer than that will use
 continuation lines as needed;

 `-m` makefile is the name of the makefile written (default Makefile);
 
 `-t` template is a file containing a list of make macros or commands
 written to the beginning of the makefile; program is the name of the
 final target (default a.out). A recent change in the behaviour of mkmf
 is that if program has the file extension .a, it is understood to be a
 library. The command to create it is \$(AR) \$(ARFLAGS) instead of
 \$(LD) \$(LDFLAGS).

 `-v` is a verbosity flag to mkmf;

 `-x` executes the makefile immediately;

 `args` are a list of directories and files to be searched for targets
 and dependencies.


#### Makefile structure

A sourcefile is any file with a source file suffix (currently .F,
.F90, .c, .f. .f90). An includefile is any file with an include file
suffix (currently .H, .fh, .h, .h90, .inc ). A valid sourcefile can
also be an includefile.

Each sourcefile in the list is presumed to produce an object file with
the same basename and a .o extension in the current working
directory. If more than one sourcefile in the list would produce
identically-named object files, only the first is used and the rest
are discarded. This permits the use of overlays: if dir3 contained the
basic source code, dir2 contained bugfixes, and dir1 contained mods
for a particular run, mkmf dir1 dir2 dir3 would create a makefile for
correct compilation. Please note that precedence descends from left to
right. This is the conventional order used by compilers when searching
for libraries, includes, etc: left to right along the command line,
with the first match invalidating all subsequent ones. See the <a
href="#examples">Examples</a> section for a closer look at precedence
rules.

The makefile currently runs \$(FC) on fortran files and \$(CC) on C
files. Flags to the compiler can be set in \$(FFLAGS) or
\$(CFLAGS). The final loader step executes \$(LD). Flags to the loader
can be set in \$(LDFLAGS). Preprocessor flags are used by .F, .F90 and
.c files, and can be set in \$(CPPFLAGS). These macros have a default
meaning on most systems, and can be modified in the template file. The
predefined macros can be discovered by running `make -p`.

In addition, the macro \$(CPPDEFS) is applied to the
preprocessor. This can contain the cpp #defines which may change from
run to run. cpp options that do not change between compilations should
be placed in \$(CPPFLAGS).

Includefiles are recursively searched for embedded includes.

For emacs users, the make target TAGS is always provided. This creates
a TAGS file in the current working directory with a cross-reference
table linking all the sourcefiles. If you don't know about emacs tags,
please consult the emacs help files! It is an incredibly useful
feature.

The default action for non-existent files is to touch them (i.e create
null files of that name) in the current working directory.

All the object files are linked to a single executable. It is
therefore desirable that there be a single main program source among
the arguments to mkmf, otherwise, the loader is likely to complain.

#### Treatment of [args]

The argument list args is treated sequentially from left to right. Arguments can be of three kinds:

If an argument is a sourcefile, it is added to the list of
sourcefiles.

If an argument is a directory, all the sourcefiles in that directory
are added to the list of sourcefiles.

If an argument is a regular file, it is presumed to contain a list of
sourcefiles. Any line not containing a sourcefile is discarded. If the
line contains more than one word, the last word on the line should be
the sourcefile name, and the rest of the line is a file-specific
compilation command. This may be used, for instance, to provide
compiler flags specific to a single file in the sourcefile list:

    a.f90
    b.f90
    f90 -Oaggress c.f90

This will add `a.f90`, `b.f90` and `c.f90` to the sourcefile list. The
first two files will be compiled using the generic command `\$(FC)
\$(FFLAGS)`. But when the make requires c.f90 to be compiled, it will
be compiled with f90 -Oaggress.

The directory abspath (specified by -a), or the current working
directory, is always the first (and top-precedence) argument, even if
args is not supplied.

#### Treatment of [-c cppdefs]

The argument cppdefs is treated as follows. cppdefs should contain a
comprehensive list of the cpp #defines to be preprocessed. This list
is compared against the current "state", maintained in the file
.cppdefs in the current working directory. If there are any changes to
this state, mkmf will remove all object files affected by this change,
so that the subsequent make will recompile those files. Previous
versions of mkmf attempted to touch the relevant source, an operation
that was only possible with the right permissions. The current version
works even with read-only source.

The file `.cppdefs` is created if it does not exist. If you wish to edit
it by hand (don't!) it merely contains a list of the cpp flags
separated by blanks, in a single record, with no newline at the end.

cppdefs also sets the make macro `CPPDEFS`. If this was set in a
template file and also in the -c flag to mkmf, the value in -c takes
precedence. Typically, you should set only `CPPFLAGS` in the template
file, and `CPPDEFS` via `mkmf -c`.

#### Treatment of includefiles

Include files are often specified without an explicit path, e.g

    #include "config.h"

or:

    #include <config.h>

By convention, the first form will take a file of that name found in
the same directory as the source, before looking at include
directories specified by `-I`. The second form ignores the local
directory and only uses `-I`.

`mkmf` does not currently distinguish between the two forms of
include. It first attempts to locate the includefile in the same
directory as the source file. If it is not found there, it looks in
the directories listed as arguments, maintaining the same
left-to-right precedence as described above.

This follows the behaviour of most f90 compilers: includefiles inherit
the path to the source, or else follow the order of include
directories specified from left to right on the f90 command line, with
the -I flags descending in precedence from left to right. It's
possible there are compilers that violate the rule: if you come across
any, please bring that to my attention.

If you have includefiles in a directory dir other than those listed
above, you can specify it yourself by including -Idir in \$(FFLAGS) in
your template file. Includepaths in the template file take precedence
over those generated by mkmf. (I suggest using FFLAGS for this rather
than CPPFLAGS because fortran includes can occur even in source
requiring no preprocessing).

Examples:

The template file for the SGI MIPSpro compiler contains:

    FC = f90
    LD = f90
    CPPFLAGS = -macro_expand
    FFLAGS = -d8 -64 -i4 -r8 -mips4 -O3
    LDFLAGS = -64 -mips4 \$(LIBS)
    LIST = -listing

The meaning of the various flags may be divined by reading the
manual. A line defining the make macro `LIBS`, e.g:

    LIBS = -lmpi

may be added anywhere in the template to have it added to the link command line.

This example illustrates the effective use of mkmf's precedence rules. Let the current working directory contain a file named path_names containing the lines:

    updates/a.f90
    updates/b.f90

The directory /home/src/base contains the files:

    a.f90
    b.f90
    c.f90

Typing

    mkmf path_names /home/src/base

produces the following Makefile:

    .DEFAULT:
    	-touch \$@
    all: a.out
    c.o: /home/src/base/c.f90
    	\$(FC) \$(FFLAGS) -c	/home/src/base/c.f90
    a.o: updates/a.f90
    	\$(FC) \$(FFLAGS) -c	updates/a.f90
    b.o: updates/b.f90
    	\$(FC) \$(FFLAGS) -c	updates/b.f90
    ./c.f90: /home/src/base/c.f90
    	cp /home/src/base/c.f90 .
    ./a.f90: updates/a.f90
    	cp updates/a.f90 .
    ./b.f90: updates/b.f90
    	cp updates/b.f90 .
    SRC = /home/src/base/c.f90 updates/a.f90 updates/b.f90
    OBJ = c.o a.o b.o
    OFF = /home/src/base/c.f90 updates/a.f90 updates/b.f90
    clean: neat
    	-rm -f .cppdefs \$(OBJ) a.out
    neat:
    	-rm -f \$(TMPFILES)
    localize: \$(OFF)
    	cp \$(OFF) .
    TAGS: \$(SRC)
    	etags \$(SRC)
    tags: \$(SRC)
    	ctags \$(SRC)
    a.out: \$(OBJ)
    	\$(LD) \$(OBJ) -o a.out \$(LDFLAGS)

Note that when files of the same name recur in the target list, the
files in the updates directory (specified in path_names) are used
rather than those in the base source repository /home/src/base.

Assume that now you want to test some changes to c.f90. You don't want
to make changes to the base source repository itself prior to testing;
so you make yourself a local copy.

    make ./c.f90

You didn't even need to know where c.f90 originally was.

Now you can make changes to your local copy ./c.f90. To compile using your changed copy, type:

    mkmf path_names /home/src/base

make

The new Makefile looks like this:

    .DEFAULT:
    	-touch \$@
    all: a.out
    c.o: c.f90
    	\$(FC) \$(FFLAGS) -c	c.f90
    a.o: updates/a.f90
    	\$(FC) \$(FFLAGS) -c	updates/a.f90
    b.o: updates/b.f90
    	\$(FC) \$(FFLAGS) -c	updates/b.f90
    ./a.f90: updates/a.f90
    	cp updates/a.f90 .
    ./b.f90: updates/b.f90
    	cp updates/b.f90 .
    SRC = c.f90 updates/a.f90 updates/b.f90
    OBJ = c.o a.o b.o
    OFF = updates/a.f90 updates/b.f90
    clean: neat
    	-rm -f .cppdefs \$(OBJ) a.out
    neat:
    	-rm -f \$(TMPFILES)
    localize: \$(OFF)
    	cp \$(OFF) .
    TAGS: \$(SRC)
    	etags \$(SRC)
    tags: \$(SRC)
    	ctags \$(SRC)
    a.out: \$(OBJ)
    	\$(LD) \$(OBJ) -o a.out \$(LDFLAGS)

Note that you are now using your local copy of c.f90 for the compile,
since the files in the current working directory always take
precedence. To revert to using the base copy, just remove the local
copy and run mkmf again.

This illustrates the use of `mkmf -c`:

    mkmf -c "-Dcppflag -Dcppflag2=2 -Dflag3=string ..."

will set `CPPDEFS` to this value, and also save this state in the file
`.cppdefs`. If the argument to `-c` is changed in a subsequent call:

mkmf -c "-Dcppflag -Dcppflag2=3 -Dflag3=string ..."

`mkmf` will scan the source list for sourcefiles that make references to
`cppflag2`, and the corresponding object files will be removed.

#### Caveats

In F90, the module name must occur on the same source line as the
module or use keyword. That is to say, if your code contained:

    use &
       this_module

it would confuse `mkmf`. Similarly, a fortran include statement must not be split across lines.

Two use statements on the same line is not currently recognized, that is:

    use module1; use module2

is to be avoided.

I currently provide a default action for files listed as dependencies
but not found: in this case, I touch the file, creating a null file of
that name in the current directory. I am willing to debate the wisdom
of this, if you are disturbed. But it is currently the least annoying
way I've found to take care of a situation when cpp #includes buried
within obsolete ifdefs ask for files that don't exist:

    #ifdef obsolete
    #include "nonexistent.h"
    #endif

If the formatting flag `-f` is used, long lines will be broken up at
intervals of 256 characters. This can lead to problems if individual
paths are longer than 256 characters.

